---
title: The Funny Young Gentleman
subtitle: by Charles Dickens
---

As one funny young gentleman will serve as a sample of all funny young
Gentlemen we purpose merely to note down the conduct and behaviour of
an individual specimen of this class, whom we happened to meet at an
annual family Christmas party in the course of this very last Christmas
that ever came.

We were all seated round a blazing fire which crackled pleasantly as
the guests talked merrily and the urn steamed cheerily—for, being an
old-fashioned party, there _was_ an urn, and a teapot besides—when
there came a postman’s knock at the door, so violent and sudden, that
it startled the whole circle, and actually caused two or three very
interesting and most unaffected young ladies to scream aloud and to
exhibit many afflicting symptoms of terror and distress, until they had
been several times assured by their respective adorers, that they were
in no danger. We were about to remark that it was surely beyond
post-time, and must have been a runaway knock, when our host, who had
hitherto been paralysed with wonder, sank into a chair in a perfect
ecstasy of laughter, and offered to lay twenty pounds that it was that
droll dog Griggins. He had no sooner said this, than the majority of
the company and all the children of the house burst into a roar of
laughter too, as if some inimitable joke flashed upon them
simultaneously, and gave vent to various exclamations of—To be sure it
must be Griggins, and How like him that was, and What spirits he was
always in! with many other commendatory remarks of the like nature.

Not having the happiness to know Griggins, we became extremely desirous
to see so pleasant a fellow, the more especially as a stout gentleman
with a powdered head, who was sitting with his breeches buckles almost
touching the hob, whispered us he was a wit of the first water, when
the door opened, and Mr. Griggins being announced, presented himself,
amidst another shout of laughter and a loud clapping of hands from the
younger branches. This welcome he acknowledged by sundry contortions of
countenance, imitative of the clown in one of the new pantomimes, which
were so extremely successful, that one stout gentleman rolled upon an
ottoman in a paroxysm of delight, protesting, with many gasps, that if
somebody didn’t make that fellow Griggins leave off, he would be the
death of him, he knew. At this the company only laughed more
boisterously than before, and as we always like to accommodate our tone
and spirit if possible to the humour of any society in which we find
ourself, we laughed with the rest, and exclaimed, ‘Oh! capital,
capital!’ as loud as any of them.

When he had quite exhausted all beholders, Mr. Griggins received the
welcomes and congratulations of the circle, and went through the
needful introductions with much ease and many puns. This ceremony over,
he avowed his intention of sitting in somebody’s lap unless the young
ladies made room for him on the sofa, which being done, after a great
deal of tittering and pleasantry, he squeezed himself among them, and
likened his condition to that of love among the roses. At this novel
jest we all roared once more. ‘You should consider yourself highly
honoured, sir,’ said we. ‘Sir,’ replied Mr. Griggins, ‘you do me
proud.’ Here everybody laughed again; and the stout gentleman by the
fire whispered in our ear that Griggins was making a dead set at us.

The tea-things having been removed, we all sat down to a round game,
and here Mr. Griggins shone forth with peculiar brilliancy, abstracting
other people’s fish, and looking over their hands in the most comical
manner. He made one most excellent joke in snuffing a candle, which was
neither more nor less than setting fire to the hair of a pale young
gentleman who sat next him, and afterwards begging his pardon with
considerable humour. As the young gentleman could not see the joke
however, possibly in consequence of its being on the top of his own
head, it did not go off quite as well as it might have done; indeed,
the young gentleman was heard to murmur some general references to
‘impertinence,’ and a ‘rascal,’ and to state the number of his lodgings
in an angry tone—a turn of the conversation which might have been
productive of slaughterous consequences, if a young lady, betrothed to
the young gentleman, had not used her immediate influence to bring
about a reconciliation: emphatically declaring in an agitated whisper,
intended for his peculiar edification but audible to the whole table,
that if he went on in that way, she never would think of him otherwise
than as a friend, though as that she must always regard him. At this
terrible threat the young gentleman became calm, and the young lady,
overcome by the revulsion of feeling, instantaneously fainted.

Mr. Griggins’s spirits were slightly depressed for a short period by
this unlooked-for result of such a harmless pleasantry, but being
promptly elevated by the attentions of the host and several glasses of
wine, he soon recovered, and became even more vivacious than before,
insomuch that the stout gentleman previously referred to, assured us
that although he had known him since he was _that_ high (something
smaller than a nutmeg-grater), he had never beheld him in such
excellent cue.

When the round game and several games at blind man’s buff which
followed it were all over, and we were going down to supper, the
inexhaustible Mr. Griggins produced a small sprig of mistletoe from his
waistcoat pocket, and commenced a general kissing of the assembled
females, which occasioned great commotion and much excitement. We
observed that several young gentlemen—including the young gentleman
with the pale countenance—were greatly scandalised at this indecorous
proceeding, and talked very big among themselves in corners; and we
observed too, that several young ladies when remonstrated with by the
aforesaid young gentlemen, called each other to witness how they had
struggled, and protested vehemently that it was very rude, and that
they were surprised at Mrs. Brown’s allowing it, and that they couldn’t
bear it, and had no patience with such impertinence. But such is the
gentle and forgiving nature of woman, that although we looked very
narrowly for it, we could not detect the slightest harshness in the
subsequent treatment of Mr. Griggins. Indeed, upon the whole, it struck
us that among the ladies he seemed rather more popular than before!

To recount all the drollery of Mr. Griggins at supper, would fill such
a tiny volume as this, to the very bottom of the outside cover.
How he drank out of other people’s glasses, and ate of other people’s
bread, how he frightened into screaming convulsions a little boy who
was sitting up to supper in a high chair, by sinking below the table
and suddenly reappearing with a mask on; how the hostess was really
surprised that anybody could find a pleasure in tormenting children,
and how the host frowned at the hostess, and felt convinced that Mr.
Griggins had done it with the very best intentions; how Mr. Griggins
explained, and how everybody’s good-humour was restored but the
child’s;—to tell these and a hundred other things ever so briefly,
would occupy more of our room and our readers’ patience, than either
they or we can conveniently spare. Therefore we change the subject,
merely observing that we have offered no description of the funny young
gentleman’s personal appearance, believing that almost every society
has a Griggins of its own, and leaving all readers to supply the
deficiency, according to the particular circumstances of their
particular case.
